The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The topic for this show will be the writers of hard science fiction, and we will
also have an interview with science fiction author Hal Clement. Science, of
course, is at the core of science fiction, its main point of distinction from
fantasy and other forms of imaginative literature. There have always been
science fiction authors who include science and technology in their stories, of
course, but there's only a handful of writers who demand that a science fiction
story have a solid, significant, and accurate scientific base. These authors
form a group writing what many readers call hard science fiction. Now, hard
science fiction is an ambiguous term, but I don't think it's yet been replaced
with anything more useful. We might try to define what we mean precisely by hard
science fiction. A lot of stories deal in psychology or social structures,
something like this, whereas a hard science story, hard science fiction story,
would deal basically with the basic sciences first. I think it would have to
deal in astronomy, chemistry, biology, physics, astrophysics, the motion of
planets and stars and things like this as a base for the story to be built upon.
I think a hard science story has to be more than just a gimmick story where
there's some kind of minor extrapolation or some new weapon or some minor thing
that would form the basis of the story. It has to be important to the plot. It
has to be integral to what's happening in the story, I think, for it to count as
a hard science fiction story. And, of course, when you look back on the history
of science fiction, we still have some authors today working who would be, I
guess, from the golden age of science fiction, writers who have strong
scientific backgrounds. Arthur C. Clarke, for instance. Poul Anderson. Isaac
Asimov. All of them either have degrees in science or are highly trained in
science. You mentioned Arthur C. Clarke. We might note his novels Fountains of
Paradise, in which he had a geosynchronous satellite connected to the earth, and
Rendezvous with Rama, which deals with an artificial world. Yes, and both Poul
Anderson and Isaac Asimov both have stories which have a good hard science
background to them. Asimov having a degree in biochemistry and Anderson having a
background in engineering. They both have a rather good scientific background to
build hard science fiction stories around. And then beginning in the early 60s
and through most of that decade, there was a new influence in science fiction,
what many critics call the new wave. And the soft sciences became important at
that time, psychology, sociology, things of that sort. And the emphasis in
science fiction came to be placed on character, on character development, social
development, and so forth. In fact, a noted Australian critic of science
fiction, George Turner, recently stated this. He said that Clement's mission of
gravity may survive on sheer elegance of conception, but that the scientific
expertise required for such work limits proliferation. The interest of the hard
science novel is mainly intellectual, and the form probably represents a dead
end, even though it still survives. And it seems to be surviving rather well. We
have some new authors who have come into the science fiction field who are
writing very good hard science stories, and they have a good background in
science, and they seem to write very intelligent work, very interesting stories.
It would seem like Mr. Turner's quote really is not true. It's just not coming
true. In fact, some of those authors have been winning Hugos and Nebulas. Joe
Haldeman comes to mind. He has a B.A. in physics and astronomy. He's done
postgraduate work in mathematics, computer science, statistics. He's edited the
magazine Astronomy, and has won both the Hugo and Nebula for his work, The
Forever War, which was based on a very hard scientific concept. Dr. Jerry
Pournelle, who has a degree in engineering. He's worked on space research
projects. He's worked on both the Mercury and Apollo projects. He's writing
science articles as well as science fiction. In fact, it's been noted that he
writes on the same level as Carl Sagan and Isaac Asimov when it comes to
relating scientific concepts to the layman so that he can understand some of the
more intricate interplays in some of the various scientific fields. Yeah, that's
interesting. A lot of these new writers, such as Pournelle and so forth, as Asimov
has done, they write science columns for magazines and science fiction books and
so forth, which indicates their interest in that subject. We should also mention
John Varley, a very highly considered science fiction writer. He's written three
novels so far, a number of short stories, but he was trained in physics. And in
such a novel as Titan and the sequel to it, Wizards, that training in physics is
very evident as he sets up an artificial world similar to a Dyson sphere and
makes it work scientifically very accurately. Another person would be James
Hogan. All of his novels are extremely scientific. The one that comes to mind is
The Two Faces of Tomorrow with a computer that's very, very believable because
it's so logical and just an extrapolation of what we know now. Yeah, I like the
way in that book, too, that he'll, in fact, all of his books, he'll get in all
sorts of extrapolation on present technology. For instance, the mass driver he
has in that book. I think that's considered to be possible today. Some
scientists are looking at it. There are models being built right now that are
working mass drivers. Also, Hogan, we can't neglect his book, Thrice Upon a
Time. I think it's the only book I can think of where time travel is made to be,
to seem at least, scientifically feasible. And we certainly need to mention
Charles Sheffield. He has a master's in math, a PhD in theoretical physics, and
he's the president of the American Astronautical Society. Yeah, mostly he's been
writing short stories, mostly for analog, but his big novel so far is The Web
Between the Worlds, published a couple of years ago, very highly received by
readers. He's also interested in the L5 Society and space colonies. Some of his
work has dealt with the problems of population on Earth and the possibility that
we could build these huge colonies orbiting the Earth that would allow us to
release some of our population pressures. Probably the most popular of the hard
science fiction authors is Hal Clement. The science fiction radio show talked
with Hal Clement about his work. You are considered one of the best of the hard
science fiction writers. Why is scientific realism so important in your work?
I'm not sure I'm a good enough psychoanalyst to answer that. I just feel that I
have trouble writing something unless I can more or less convince myself that it
might happen. The best example, I guess, was my attempt a few years ago to write
a story for an anthology of vampire tales. When I had finished it, I discovered
that it was a science fiction story. I just accounted for everything that
happened on a scientific basis, and I wasn't happy about it until I could
account for them that way. Much of your early work was published by John
Campbell, who is noted for his desire for scientific accuracy in the stories he
printed. Did he have much to do with the type of stories that you wrote? Yes,
very certainly it did. John was the one who bought my first several stories. I
knew him quite well, talked to him quite often. While I didn't always agree with
him, we both felt that there were rules and that they ought to be followed. What
kind of rules were those? Well, I mean, rules of the universe. We were both
materialists, I guess. We felt that the universe does run by rule. And we felt
that a story was most believable when it matched those rules, at least as we,
meaning humanity in general, currently understood them. How did you get started
writing? Rather gradually, I was reading the stuff originally. I started, I
think, with the Buck Rogers comic strip, and I discovered there were magazines.
I began telling the stories that I'd read in magazines to friends in the grade
school playground and to Boy Scouts at campfires. Then I began correcting some
of the errors that I spotted in the stories and eventually began trying to write
my own. In your novel, Mission of Gravity, it's been noted that you took great
care in designing the world of Mesklin. How did you go about designing the
world of Mescaline? It was mostly slide rule work. Part of it was my contrary
nature. I had read stories in which planets had extra heavy gravity, stories in
which the planets had very light gravity. It seemed sort of, of course, there
could be no planet with varying gravity. And I took the, of course, as a
challenge. So I went to work. I am, as I say, a rather firm materialist. I have
serious doubts in things like gravity screens, anti-gravity machines. The only
thing I could think of which would produce such a variation was rapid spin. And
this was before you could steal time on computers because they hadn't been
invented. I did a good deal of slide rule work and also some consultation with
such astronomy text as I could get hold of. And I came up with what seemed to be
a valid planet at the time. There have been errors discovered in it since, I'm
afraid. Ah. Does that have reference to the afterward in the book Mission of
Gravity where you play what you call the game? Yes. Somebody was playing the
game. I believe it was a group of members of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Science Fiction Society, MITSFS for short. And they began taking
Mesklin apart mathematically. I understand from some of them that the planet
actually should come to a sharp edge of the equator instead of a smooth curve.
But I am not a good enough mathematician myself to check up on this point. One
particular point about the Mesklinites. Possibly through my own ignorance, I
was never able to tell how they conversed with each other. They used a vocal
language, sound. They didn't breathe as we did. I tried to account for their
having vocal apparatus by its developing from a swimming siphon analogous to
those of our own squid. Some people say that your alien psychology is too human
and other people say that you create a very alien psychology for your aliens.
How do you go about developing the psychology for your aliens? Well, the, I am
not sure, first of all, that an intelligent being's psychology would be all that
different from the human one anyway. It is going to depend on the being's
motivation. Presumably the creature will be driven so as to survive. He or she
or it or they, if they have several sexes, are going to have drives to find
food, to avoid pain. If they do have sexes, they will have drives to use them,
exercise them. And all of those will tend to provide motivation recognizably
similar to those of humanity. I have a book that's just come out, The Nitrogen
Fix, in which my alien does not have sex. And I spent a good deal of time trying
to find an alternative drive which would be as powerful. I think I found it, but
I'm not going to go into that here. I'd rather you have bought the book and
decided for yourself. The planning part depended on that belief mostly. I felt
that the drives could be at least understood by a human being. For those people
who say that my aliens are noticeably alien, not human in psychology, I'm afraid
I have a rather cynical answer. My secret for making a being seem non-human is
to make him act rationally. For example, I can be fairly specific about this
one. in the sequel to
Mission of Gravity, Starlight. At one point I had one of my Mesklinites driving one of these
giant tanks along completely unknown territory. And nothing was happening. He wanted to get
somewhere. And he gradually began going a little faster, a little faster as a
human being would do. Then he suddenly realized what he was doing and slowed
down again. Which is, of course, the rational thing to do. My own suspicion is
that nine human beings out of ten would not have slowed down until they'd run
into something. What caused you to write the sequels to both Mission of Gravity
and Needle? In a sense, I was talked into it. I'm very uneasy about sequels and
series stories in general. My experience has been reading them, but I was always
disappointed by the later ones. I'd formed my opinion of what things were like.
The later stories usually changed those opinions and disappointed me. The
Mission of Gravity sequel came as a result of a conversation, I think, at one of
the New York conventions. A fan said something, and I can't now remember exactly
what it was, which sounded like a good idea to use the Mesklinites. And I built
it up from there. I can be much more specific about the Needle sequel. There was
one particular science fiction fan who was always asking me when it was going to
come out. Every time I met him at a convention, when is the Needle sequel
coming, Hal? Finally, he changed his tactic. One fine day at a Philadelphia
convention, he walked up to me and said, Hal, you promised if I stopped smoking
you would write a sequel to Needle. I've stopped. Get at it. Well, I had no
recollection of ever making such a deal, but I couldn't spoil any such success
story. So I got to work on it. Not very fast, but I got a little done. Then I
was telling this same story at another convention, I think in Toronto, two or
three years later. And Judy-Lynn del Ray of Del Ray Books overheard me, and the
next thing I knew I had signed a contract. So he got what he wanted anyway. He
got what he wanted. It's the gent to whom the book is dedicated. He just called
me up a couple of nights ago. He's been out of the country and just got back. So
I guess he's getting back into science fiction activities. There was sort of a
tongue-in-cheek style to your short story, The Critical Factor, where there are
beings living in the earth beneath us who are just as unaware of us as we are
unaware of them. What type of psychology and physiology did you develop for
creatures that could flow through solid rock? It was written long enough ago
now, so I'm afraid I don't recall all the details of what led up to it. The idea
of having creatures not understanding or not being aware of others has been part
of my basic science fiction frame for a long time. I think it's a very likely
sort of thing, though I don't like to go into anything as extreme as the fourth
dimension. The idea of something which could soak through rock, well, I have had
courses in things like seismology, although I never specialized in any of the
geological sciences. I know a reasonable amount of chemistry, and this just
seemed like a perfectly possible situation to me. And it was fun figuring out
what would happen when a creature like this encountered an open space where
gravity could take over. Meaning a creature like that had never felt the force
of gravity before. Right. Which of course a fish wouldn't have either. I may
possibly have considered intelligent fish when I was planning that story, but as
I say, it was so long ago now I don't really remember. This was 27 years or so
ago, if I recall. You wrote most of your short stories early on, didn't you?
Yes. It's been a hobby all along. And in the last few years there somehow seems
to have been less and less time. I've been doing more work connected with my
profession of high school science teaching. I'm currently president-elect of the
New England Association of Chemistry Teachers, and I have an awful feeling
that's going to take a lot of my time for the next two and a half years. Yes, it
sounds like that might take up a lot of your time. I find Needle one of your
most fascinating books. It's been said by whom I don't know that a good science
fiction mystery could not be written. John Campbell used to make that claim, and
I suspect that Needle was written at least partly to try to prove John wrong.
Ah. When it was coming out as a serial, he made one of his trips to the greater
Boston area. The first of the two parts of the serial was on the stands then,
and he began to talk about it to an MIT audience, got a loud scream of, don't
give the solution away. He admitted that he was wrong about science fiction
mysteries not being possible. The detective in the Needle is a symbiote living
in its host body. Where did you come up with that, Deo? It's really a unique
idea. Well, the idea is really not very new. The basic notion of what you might
call possession has been part of human mythology probably since long before we
learned to write. And many science fiction stories prior to Needle had had this,
that, or the other sort of creature entering the human body and doing various
things. The one I can remember most vividly was by Nathan Schachner, a two-part
serial called "Infra-Universe", which appeared in the December 1936, January 1937
issues of Astounding Stories. One reason that I am that good in the memory is I
have the December 36 Astounding open in front of me. At the moment I've been
reading old collection stuff. And that had virus-like creatures moving into the
human body and taking control. Again, I was more materialistic. I didn't think
that such a creature could take over as easily as was suggested in some of these
stories. And I felt that the hunter would have to do quite a job of work before
he had any real effect of communication to say nothing of control in his host.
Yes, and all the time I was reading the needle I was wondering why doesn't he
vibrate his ear? And then that's what you have him do in the sequel. Eventually,
yes, the idea was worked out. Well, I have to admit that that idea didn't occur
to me until later. I will just have to admit that it didn't occur to the hunter
either. Yes, well, both you and the hunter probably think along the same lines.
Yes, I'm not the sort of craftsman who can come up with a personality totally
different from my own and make it sound believable. There are people who are
much better at that art than I am. Robert Heinlein, for example, can write
Stranger in a Strange Land, become practically a god to the hippies, and then
write Starship Trooper and have everybody thinking he's a Nazi. And this, in my
opinion, neither of them reflects his own beliefs. It simply shows his skill at
the character portrayal. I can't do that. I can't come close to it. No, but you
do have some of the best aliens I've ever read. Do you have any authors that you
think put together good aliens? Well, my favorite, I think, is Poul Anderson,
who has done a good deal of this sort of thing, too. We have worked together to
a certain extent. We collaborated by mail in putting together the planetary
system in which his novel Fire Time took place. I supposedly have rights to a
few planets in the same system, and if time ever permits, I may write some
stories about them. Aside from aliens in particular, do you have any authors
whom you think are writing good hard science? Well, Poul still comes to mind,
first of all. Arthur Clarke, of course, knows his relevant space science very
thoroughly, and he doesn't do silly things like having spaceships fall into the
sun when their engines quit. Isaac Asimov, although he doesn't write very much
science fiction now, seldom makes really serious science mistakes in it. A lot
of the new writers, I'm sorry to say I can't cite by name. Several of them are
pretty good, but my memory for names is terrible, and it's the start of the
school year, and I'm currently trying to learn the names of about 75 students of
my own. Back to the subject of aliens again, do you think anybody's ever put
together a good alien for the movies? I haven't seen by any means all of the
movie science fiction things. The one that was called Alien, I gather, was very
impressive, but was so mostly by avoiding detailed portrayal of his or its or
her nature, which is, of course, is a perfectly good trick. I can't think of any
alien I have seen in a movie who was really believable in character, believably
alien. Now, what was his name, Yoda or something like that, and the Empire
Strikes Back was funny and good as far as, I guess it's he, went. Ah, who else?
Now, that's pretty well. They're the only one, that's the only one I can think
of who was very impressive. There were several unnamed species in the bar scene
in the first of the shows, the Star Wars, where the disguise was good. The
arguing back and forth in a completely unintelligible language produced a very
impressive and funny scene. But again, you can't really tell what the
personalities of the creatures were like. They were very much like drunks in a
terrestrial bar. I think a good job was done, but I wouldn't say they were
really alien. I don't know what can be done. The movie, the visual field,
either movies or TV, represents quite a different problem from the writing one.
And I know just enough about it to realize what the difference is. I would
question my own ability to write a good TV script or a movie script. Because you
are depending a great deal on what the customer sees, rather than on the words
you can use, the paragraphs you can build to explain what the background
situation is. I don't know how that problem is solved, really. Possibly with a
lot of money. Well, that certainly helped. But I don't think money is the whole
answer to a problem like that. You need somebody who has not merely an
imagination, but a skill in the field. He has to have experience. He has to have
knowledge, which I think probably can only come from experience, of what those
visual media can and can't do, and in what ways practically they differ from the
written word. And here I'm quite aware of my own limitations, and I shouldn't
even try to sell what those differences are, because most of them I probably
don't even recognize. Yes, I see what you mean now. In your current book, The
Nitrogen Fix, how did you come up with the idea about the oxygen being gone from
the Earth's atmosphere, or at least bonded with nitrogen? That's right. The idea
itself is not new. It was used many years ago in a story called The Mightiest
Machine by John Campbell, in which someone invented a catalyst which permitted
the direct combination of nitrogen and oxygen to dinitrogen pentoxide. Actually,
such a catalyst wouldn't work, apparently, nearly as I've been able to figure
out from the available free energies concerned. But with a little juggling and
having life forms involved, which can balance off the increase in free energy in
one place with a decrease in another, it seemed possible to me. Also, again, I
was more careful quantitatively than John was. He had the snowflakes of nitrogen
pentoxide drifting out of the sky and bursting into flame as they hit organic
matter and oxidized it, and the red-brown gases that rose when the high oxides
of nitrogen got reduced by other things like organics, and the streams fuming as
the oxides of nitrogen boiled into them. And there's a very impressive book,
beautiful adventure story, but unfortunately there isn't that much oxygen in the
Earth's atmosphere. You couldn't have made that much dinitrogen pentoxide. And I
had to tone everything down a good deal and have the worst of it have happened
in the past and try to figure out what the final results would have been, or
intermediate results anyway, a couple of thousand years after things had
started. But I'd been working on that quantitatively for a long time, because I
can remember giving a talk on the general subject to a local college somewhere
about the winter of 1958-59. Oh, I see. You've been working on the basic outline
of this book for a long time. Yes, indeed. Are you working on anything new right
now? Only in the sense that whenever I think of some idea which might be useful,
I stick it on a 3x5 card and put it where I can find it again. When the pile of
cards gets high enough, I start spreading it out, seeing if they can be put into
any sort of rational sequence. School has just started in the last couple of
weeks, and I really haven't time to do very much of that for a while. I won't
have for a few months. I won't have time. Well, Christmas vacation will be the
first time I can do very much on that line.
The works of Hal Clement and others who write hard science fiction are truer to
the appellation science fiction than many others who write in the genre. Fiction
that is not set in either our present or the known past can easily become
unrealistic, but with the governing effect of scientific background, the
fantasies of the future are given plausibility. Perhaps this combination of
fantasy and plausibility is what draws so many humans to the Empyrean realms of
science fiction.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.